Alright, well, if we ask you any dumb questions or one that you don't feel comfortable with
or you don't like your answer, just tell us and we'll start it over, okay?
Oh, alright.
Okay.
The first Wizard of Oz book, the Wizard of Oz, came out in 1900.
How old was Frank Baum then?
He was 44 years old at that time.
Had he done any other fiction before he started on the Wizard series, the Oz series?
Well, he had out several other books before then.
His first book was a book on how to raise chickens in 1886, the book of the Hamburgs.
But his most famous books were for children and he had a book out in 1897 called Mother Goose in Prose.
And then in 1899 he had out one that proved very popular, successful, called Father Goose, his book.
And in the same year he brought out the Wizard of Oz in 1900, he had three other books at the same time.
What kind of audience was Baum aiming for when he wrote the Oz books?
Well, he had young sons at the time that he supposedly told the stories to.
And I suppose children become temporary with his own children.
I don't know quite what audience because the books have a wide appeal to people of all ages.
But probably he was aiming at children 10, 12 long there.
In reading the books, I see it on two levels.
My five-year-old daughter enjoys the witches and the magic and the cute characters.
And I enjoy the puns and that sort of thing.
I was wondering if anybody knows how much effort he put into the upper level versus the lower level, the children's level.
No, I don't know how much he put into it. Apparently he wrote fairly effortlessly though.
I have seen only one of his manuscripts.
It happened to be the one for Glinda of Oz.
It's an amazingly clean manuscript. Very few corrections entered or anything.
And he wrote in longhand first and then he typed the manuscript later.
And that's when he made whatever editing he had.
But it seems just to come quite easily to it.
Are his manuscripts and other personal memorabilia collected anywhere?
Well, there are not many of them that are in existence.
If they were, they would indeed be a collector's item.
At the end of the sixth book, the Emerald City of Oz,
Bob apparently wanted to stop because he sealed off Oz and then the seventh one appeared.
Was he serious about wanting to call it off at number six?
Apparently he was. He felt he had written maybe enough about Oz
that he was getting typed as an author.
And while he was very proud to be associated with Oz, he thought it was very successful,
he did want to write many other things.
And so he thought that was the best way to end it.
Was there truly a landslide of letters and telegrams to him
that made him want to go ahead and write some more?
Apparently there were a lot of letters and publishers received letters also.
He did write two other books that weren't about Oz after he wrote the sixth book.
And they were not as successful and children still asked for more about Oz,
so two, three years later he returned to Oz.
In the forwards to the books, he mentions that the children wrote and suggested this or that.
Are those apocryphal stories or are those pretty much true?
I really don't know.
I suspect that from what I know about him that the books are entirely his own.
Of course everyone gets inspiration from some source or other,
but I have an idea that as a careful writer, the books are largely his own creation.
Were they a financial success for him?
Did he become independently wealthy before them?
Well, he certainly made a living from them.
He was able to build a comfortable home in Hollywood,
and after his death, his widow lived in it for the rest of her days.
And the house stood, I believe, until about 1954, but it's no longer there now.
But anyway, yes, he made a good living from them.
The last novel that he wrote, Glenda of Oz, was number 14, and it was copyrighted in 1920.
I said, when did he die? 1919?
Yes, he died in 1919.
At the time he died, he had been sick for about a year, year and a half,
and he had a couple of manuscripts completed ahead so that they could be published even after he had died.
Did he live any notes or diaries or anything about other stories that he had planned to write?
That's a tradition that he did, but no one's ever found any.
There was one brief little chapter of a book that may have been by him,
but some accepted it as by him.
I'm inclined to.
Others are doubtful if it really was his.
The reason I'm inclined to accept it is because it was about the Magic Lake south of the Emerald City.
And Bob had written about almost everything on the Oz map except that.
And I don't know how perceptive anyone else would have been to write about that very lake he hadn't written about before.
But at any rate, it was the first chapter of his story.
It's impossible to tell how it would have developed from the one little chapter.
Since Bon wrote his 14 novels, there have been a number of other novels written.
How many have been written here up till now?
Well, nowadays there are 40 books in the series, which means there would be 26 in the series after that one.
But there are other Oz books besides the ones in the official series.
How soon after Bon's death did people start writing novels, picking up where he left off?
Apparently right away.
I have visited the publisher and they had a novel, a manuscript novel, that they had received and liked very much.
But they had already had a contract with another author to continue the series.
So there seems to be some evidence that the other authors had ideas of continuing the series from the beginning.
This question is probably kind of hard to answer.
Do the subsequent works more or less maintain the same quality?
And are they successful on the adult level and the child's level as successful as Bon's original works were?
Well, probably.
Well, here's where you get into rather subjective feelings about them.
And it's difficult to give a definitive answer on this.
But each author wrote somewhat differently about Oz.
As a child, I accepted all of the books and enjoyed them.
But as an adult, I can see differences between the way the authors wrote.
And there are people who will not read any books except Bon's.
And then there's others that will accept this author, that author, and are choosy that way.
But the authors often wrote just for the children and didn't attempt to write on quite so many levels.
So there are strange things in the other books by that, I mean on different levels, called the level of meaning in terms of course.
But Bon seemed to be more successful at that than the others were consistently doing.
Okay, I'm having a little bit of trouble hearing you now.
We're having some stormy weather here.
If you could talk just a little louder, let's see if that works.
Okay, have there been any serious academic studies of say comparisons of Bon's work with subsequent works?
Theses, dissertations, that sort of thing?
Well, yes, there have been.
I know of one person who wrote a doctoral dissertation on Bon's books.
And the person is now a professor of English.
There have been many essays written about the Oz books.
And as a matter of fact, a book of them being gathered together will come out this fall.
But just how many there are, I couldn't tell you.
The Oz idea has, well, there have been a lot of plays and movies and cartoons and such that have been inspired by the Oz idea.
They invariably changed the script or the script has changed from the major works.
Why is that? Why doesn't somebody do the Wizard of Oz as it was written, something like that?
Why do they feel compelled to change it?
Well, I suppose to fit the drama into what they can work with,
yet sometimes it's quite difficult to fit in certain characteristics of Oz, the different magic and so on.
For instance, in the stage play of 1902 and 3, in that period of time, Dorothy's dog, Toto, didn't appear in it at all.
Instead, they had a calf for a pet.
An actor could play the part of a calf, whereas an actor as a dog would have had a difficult time, especially a tiny dog.
It seems to be necessary to do it to make the dramatization. They've almost all done it.
Did that play appear on Broadway?
Yes. It started in Chicago in 1902, but early in 1903 it moved to Broadway, and it ran there and one theater or another for a number of years, for five years or more.
And then for many years after that there were road shows of it.
So apparently it's quite a successful play.
It seemed to be.
Have there been any more plays based on it? I guess the Wiz was. Is there been anything else?
The Wiz was based on it, and the Wiz was fairly close to the book.
Yes, there have been plays, but many plays put on about The Wizard of Oz.
Occasionally, someone dramatizes one of the other books, but that doesn't happen very often.
The Wizard of Oz is overwhelmingly the best known, of course.
It's my understanding that, is it the Disney Studios that bought the rights to all of Balm's works, or all of his Oz works?
They have the rights, as I understand, to great many of the Balm Oz books.
Of course, MGM had the right to The Wizard of Oz, but I believe the Disney Studios has the rights to all the others of the Balm Oz books.
And apparently they are working on an Oz film at the present time.
Why have the Oz works stayed so popular? They were apparently popular when they first came out.
They're still popular today. Why, for 80, whatever years? Why have they maintained their popularity?
What is in them that is so universally appealing?
Well, apparently something is in them that's universally appealing.
I guess the idea of a little girl speaking home strikes a responsive chord with some people.
And of course, the search for wisdom, courage, and kindness are certain noble ideals.
And a humbug wizard and so on also was attractive.
But there's just something about them that strikes a certain response to some kind of people.
And it's difficult to explain what it is.
As a matter of fact, if you ask six different people, you probably get six different answers.
Different ones will not even agree on which books they would prefer, of the ones they've read.
It much depends on the circumstances under which you read the book, I suppose.
Another gentleman that was apparently quite important to the series was John R. Neal,
whom I have heard was called the Imperial Illustrator of Oz.
How did he get hooked up with the series and has any artist ever equalled his work for the Oz series?
Well, the publishers asked him to illustrate the second Oz book.
And after that, they liked his work and asked him to illustrate the others.
He was a young artist in Philadelphia at the time and had illustrated things there and other books even.
But he was just starting his career in 1994 when the second Oz book came out.
And he became very closely associated with Oz.
Many persons think of the characters as he drew them, rather than as any other artist drew them.
And, of course, eventually he wrote three books as well as illustrated them.
Between 1944 and 1942, he illustrated all of the Oz books that came out, which is quite a span of years.
We were just talking that the books did have universal appeal.
And, of course, the reason we're talking to you is because you're associated with the International Wizard of Oz Club.
Tell us a little bit about that organization, how large it is, what kinds of people are in it, that sort of thing.
Well, the club has different times, between a thousand, two thousand members.
And all kinds of people are in the club.
Very young children, adults, many years are in it.
And all kinds of interests and professions are in it.
But we do have in common some affection for Oz or the creation or idea of it.
Many of us are collecting the books and many just simply want reading copies.
Others want to build fine collections.
Some have other interests, such as the 1939 movie and finding all kinds of memorabilia concerning it.
There's all kinds of ways to build an Oz collection.
But we get together and we talk over the books and what we like best.
We have quizzes over the books.
We collect the old films.
There were, El Frank Baum had an Oz film company in 1915.
We collected some of the films made then, fourteen to fifteen films.
We're silent, of course, but interested to see how he thought an Oz film should be made.
And we do all kinds of things.
We sing some of the songs from the stage plays, discuss how to identify the different editions.
Well, I just generally just, it's a mutual interest organization.
And help each other find the books we need.
So there's a whole subculture of people who collect Oz memorabilia as well as are just interested in Oz.
Well, yes, there are quite a few collectors of this.
I'm sure there are many more people collected than just the ones in the club.
But we do seem to enjoy each other's company and seeing our mutual interest.
Where do people find the old books?
I happen to be a book collector myself.
Nothing quite this esoteric.
But I would think some of the first editions of Oz would be pretty rare and pretty hard to come by.
Do people pull them out of their attic sometimes or find them at a garage sale or whatever and everybody celebrates?
Very much like that.
There, of course, where you find them.
But sometimes someone will, when you're not an addict, find in a box that there's some old Oz books that somebody put away years ago.
And they, or no one in the family has interest in them and then they do sell them.
Sometimes you get them from the book dealer.
Oftentimes it's just upon finding them, searching them out.
And it's, well, like building your own Yellowbrick Road, I guess, you first start out with reading copies and then you want better copies.
And you have to have first editions.
And there's just no end to it.
There are also, as my understanding, I guess Oz toys, dolls of the characters and models and that sort of thing.
Where did they, were those just toys or were they cereal box prizes or where did they pop up through the years?
Well, there were quite a few things that came out in connection with the 1939 film.
And apparently a lot more came out about the time of the Wiz stage play.
A lot of more Oz things.
Oftentimes they are in connection with the film or some of the stage play, rather than just the books themselves.
There have been a few things in connection with the, with the books, such as Board Game, which is like a map of the land of Oz.
You advance down the Yellowbrick Road by turn.
But most of the things are in connection with the 39 movie or some other dramatization.
Well, there's all kinds of things.
There's dolls, there's clothes, there's dishes.
There's no end to it.
As a matter of fact, that's one of the projects the club is doing now, trying to catalog a few things.
But we are not nearly finished doing it.
Is the interest in Oz cyclical or it comes and goes or has it been pretty steady over the years?
Well, in my own association with the club, it's been fairly steady.
Not everyone is known about the club.
But there's always been a core group that has been interested in it.
And while membership doesn't always take consistent, each year people have to renew their membership if they want to keep it up.
It's been fairly constant.
Are reprints of Balm's work, the ones I'm specifically talking here now, are the Valentine paperback releases?
Are those abridged in any manner?
Are they straight things?
I think they're straight books.
I don't think they're abridged in any way.
I'd say that without it.
I don't believe I've examined them back closely.
But as far as I know, they are careful reprints.
One thing that impressed me about those particular reprints is the front covers are paintings based on the, I guess in all cases, but one, the needle drawings from the interior.
And I'm not that much of an expert, but it really, my daughter really likes them.
She can look at the cover and pick out who everybody is.
And they're really nice.
They're not abstract and they're not changed from the way the books are.
Have you looked at the covers that closely on these new ones?
Well, this is a very bright and colorful looking eye-attracting.
People that are Oz fans, do they, can you generalize in any way?
Do they have any other interests in the world of fantasy, per se?
Well, many of them do have other interests.
Collect more things than just the Oz books.
That's true.
I don't know if they all do or not.
I don't suppose they do.
I don't know all the club members personally, but I probably know more than any other person.
But yes, many of them have other interests.
Some just like children's books in general.
Others will have something entirely different to their collecting, but they'll have another set of things besides Oz things.
When somebody writes a book in the Oz series, is it cleared with the club as far as being in the,
in the, kind of joining the fold of the Oz series?
Or is this something that's just kind of unofficial?
Somebody writes a book and it either is accepted or not.
Is there anything official there?
No, there's nothing official.
The club has no authority to do anything like that.
The club has published some Oz books, but we've done it with the commission of the publisher who published the series.
And we, I don't think we would publish one unless the publisher agreed that we could.
In my research, the name that I came across quite often was Ruth Plumlee Thompson,
who apparently wrote Oz books from what, 1921 to 1939.
How many did she end up writing?
She wrote 19 books for the series.
And then she wrote a couple of others which the club published, which are not part of the series,
but they're her books though, just the same.
And she wrote five other books that aren't about Oz, one of which was published by John Arneo called
The Curious Cruise of Captain Sando, which is quite a collector's item to mind.
She was a very delightful lady. I met her several times.
And she lived until 1976, so of course she hasn't gone too long now.
But she was totally unpredictable, very much like one of her own characters, absolutely delightful.
Very witty and very, very intelligent lady.
And just never knew what she would say next, what she would do.
Does the Oz fan club have annual conventions?
Yes. We like to pretend that the United States, like the land of Oz,
divided up into several regions or parts, so that when we hold one on the east coast,
we remember that the Munchkins lived in the east part of Oz, so that's the Munchkins Convention.
And let me hold one in the western part of the United States though, that's where the Winkies lived in Oz.
So we have a Winky convention out in California.
So we divide up into something like that.
We hold four or five conventions to each year, and I have several smaller ones rather than a very large one.
It's easier to get to more locally, I suppose.
I try to get to most of it myself, though not everybody else does.
I would think you have the ideal profession for something like this,
because you're off some in the summer and can spend time with your hobby.
I guess this is really more than a hobby, but at least you get a chance to have some free time to do it.
Yes, that is true. Most conventions are held in the summer, but it is possible for them to get to it.
That's one reason I've been able to do this.
Well, I enjoy doing it. It helps hold the club together a little bit, I guess.
How often do you reread the various books?
Well, I'm looking into them constantly for various points, and research and so on.
To sit down and read them has probably been some time.
I find I recall them fairly well, however, because I'm working with Roz all the time.
But as some of the books I haven't read for some time.
If one of our listeners wanted to join the International Wizard of Oz fan club, what should they do?
Well, I could write to me, as a climate secretary.
Part of my job is to tell people about the club and involve members.
Would you like my address then?
Sure, that would be fine.
My name is Fred Meyer, M-E-Y-E-R.
I live at 220 North 11th Street in Escanaba, Michigan.
Escanaba spelled E-S-C-A-N-A-V-A, Michigan 49-18-9.
I guess Escanaba gets spelled a lot of ways through the years.
Occasionally it's Ozcanaba, but I get the letters anyway.
Would you have any objection if... I don't know what our syndicators think.
I'll have to ask them, but if we put the address on the air, would that be okay?
That would be alright with A-S.
Alright. Well, sir, I enjoyed very much finding out about the Wizard of Oz fan club.
The series, as I mentioned to you, my daughter and I have read it. We're on number nine now.
And it's just delightful. And probably whenever we finish it, I'll start reading it to my son, who's a little younger.
And you may have some converts here.
What's been a pleasure to talk to you.
But we sure appreciate your talking to us.
And lots of luck on finding those collector's items.
I'm a book collector. And if I see anything, I'll let you know.
I don't know how much Oz material made it out to West Texas, but I get around a little bit.
And now I'll keep an eye out for it. I've never really noticed it before.
I'm sure I just have overlooked it.
And so I've discovered something myself here.
Well, great. Again, it's a pleasure talking to you. We sure appreciate it.
Well, I've enjoyed it.
Great. Okay. Take care now.
Talk to you later, I'm sure. Bye-bye now.